Creating image maps
======================================================================

An image map defines areas of an image (called hotspots)
with hyperlinks to web addresses, other files on the computer, or parts of the
same document. Hotspots are the graphic equivalent of text hyperlinks (for more
information, see Chapter 4, Working with Styles, Templates, and Hyperlinks).

178

Clicking on a hotspot causes LibreOffice to open the linked page in the
appropriate program (for example, the default browser for an HTML page;
LibreOffice Calc for an ODS file; a PDF viewer for a PDF). Hotspots can be in
various shapes and several hotspots can be included on the same image.

Image map editor
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1)

In a LibreOffice document, select the image where hotspots are going to be
defined.

2)

Go to Tools > ImageMap on the Menu bar to open the ImageMap Editor dialog
(Figure 120). The main part of the dialog displays the image where hotspots are
to be defined.

3)

Use the tools and fields in the dialog to define the required hotspots and
links. A hotspot is identified by a line indicating its shape. The information
needed for the hotspot includes the address pointed to by the hyperlink and the
text to be displayed when the cursor is moved over the hotspot.

4)

Click on Apply to apply the settings.

5)

Click Save to save the image map to a file, then close the dialog.

Image map tools
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The toolbar at the top of the dialog contains the following
tools and text boxes to specify the properties of an image map: Apply Applies
any changes made. Open Opens a file browser window for navigating to a folder
where an image map has been saved. Save Opens a file browser window for
navigating to a folder where the image map is to be saved. Close Closes the
Image Map dialog. A confirmation window opens asking for confirmation of what
happens to any changes that have been made. Select Used to select a hotspot that
has been created on an image. Rectangle, Ellipse, Polygon and FreeForm Polygon
Drawing tools for hotspot shapes. These tools work in exactly the same way as
the corresponding tools in the Drawing toolbar. Edit Points, Move Points, Insert
Points, Delete Points Advanced editing tools to manipulate the shape of a
polygon hotspot. Select Edit Points first to activate the other points tools.
Undo Reverses any previous action taken. Redo Carries out any action that has
been previously undone. Active Toggles the status of the hotspot activating a
selected hotspot or deactivating it if active.

179

Macro Associates a macro with the hotspot instead of a hyperlink. Properties
Sets the hyperlink properties and adds the Name attribute to the hyperlink.
Address Enter the URL address that points to a hyperlink, or to an anchor in a
document (for example a specific slide number). Using an anchor in a document,
write the address in this format: file:///<path>/document_name#anchor_name. Text
Enter the text that is displayed when the cursor is moved over the hotspot.
Frame Where the target of the hyperlink opens. _blank Opens in a new browser
window. _self Default selection and opens in the current window. _top File opens
in the topmost frame in the hierarchy. _parent File opens in the parent frame of
the current frame. If there is no parent frame, the current frame is used.

Note The value _self for the target frame works in the vast majority of
occasions. It is not recommended to use the other selections unless absolutely
necessary.

