Fontwork
======================================================================

With Fontwork, graphical text art objects can be created to make a
document more attractive. There are many different settings for text art objects
(line, area, position, size, and more) giving a large selection of effects.
Fontwork is available with the Writer, Calc, Draw, and Impress modules of
LibreOffice, but there are small differences in the way that each module
displays Fontwork.

Creating Fontwork
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1)

Click on Insert Fontwork Text on the Drawing toolbar, or go to Insert > Fontwork
on the Menu bar to open the Fontwork Gallery dialog (Figure 126).

2)

Select a Fontwork style from the dialog and click OK. The selected Fontwork
appears centrally on the page and the dialog closes.

3)

Double-click on the Fontwork text graphic to switch on editing mode.

4)

Type in the required text to replace the default text in the Fontwork graphic
and the text appears over the default text as shown by the example in Figure
127.

5)

Press Esc key, or click outside the Fontwork graphic and the text replaces
default text.

Figure 125: Fontwork toolbar

184

Figure 126: Fontwork Gallery dialog

Figure 127: Example of creating Fontwork

185

Figure 128: Fontwork panel in Properties deck on Sidebar

Fontwork toolbar
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Fontwork toolbar (Figure 125) becomes visible and active
when a Fontwork object is selected. If the toolbar is not visible, go to View >
Toolbars > Fontwork on the Menu bar. Also, the Fontwork panel opens in the
Properties deck on the Sidebar (Figure 128) and contains the same tools as the
Fontwork toolbar. Insert Fontwork Text Opens the Fontwork Gallery dialog.
Fontwork Shape Changes the shape of the selected object. Clicking on the
triangle â–¼ next to Fontwork Shape opens the Fontwork Shape sub-toolbar (Figure
129) allowing selection of different Fontwork shapes.

Figure 129: Fontwork Shape sub-toolbar Fontwork Same Letter Heights Changes the
height of characters in the selected Fontwork object. Toggles between normal
height where the characters have different heights to where all characters have
the same height. Fontwork Alignment Specifies the text alignment within the
frame. Options available are Left Align, Center, Right Align, Word Justify, and
Stretch Justify. The effects of the text alignment can only be seen if the text
spans over two or more lines. In the Stretch Justify mode, all lines are filled
completely. Fontwork Character Spacing Selects the spacing between characters
and whether kerning pairs are used. Options available are Very Tight, Tight,
Normal, Loose, Very Loose, and Custom Spacing. For Custom Spacing, input a
percentage value: 100% is normal character spacing, less than 100% character
spacing is tighter, and more than 100% character spacing is looser. Toggle
Extrusion Converts the Fontwork object into a 3D shape using extrusion. See the
Draw Guide for more information. 186 | Chapter 5, Working with Images and
Graphics

Editing Fontwork
----------------------------------------------------------------------

It is possible to treat Fontwork text as an object and apply
all the formatting that has been described in this chapter. Assign line
properties only to Fontwork that does not have a 3D effect, otherwise the
changes are not visible. Also, modify some of the Fontwork shapes by moving the
dot that is displayed along with the selection handles. This is similar to
modification of the angles of trapezoid and parallelogram basic shapes.

