Images and graphics
======================================================================

Creating
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Image and graphic files are created using a
graphics program, scanning, or downloading from the Internet, or photos from a
digital camera. When downloading image and graphic files from the Internet, make
sure the licensing, or copyright, allows the use of an image or graphic.
LibreOffice can import, rotate and flip various vector (line drawing) image and
graphic files. LibreOffice also supports raster (bitmap) file formats and the
most common formats for raster files are GIF, JPG, PNG, and BMP. See Appendix B
for a full list of image and graphic formats that LibreOffice can import.
LibreOffice can also import SmartArt images from Microsoft Office files. For
example, Writer can open a Microsoft Word file that contains SmartArt and edit
the SmartArt images.

Editing
----------------------------------------------------------------------

To edit photos and other bitmap images, use a bitmap editor. To edit
line drawings, use a vector drawing program. There is no need to use additional
graphic applications because LibreOffice Draw has the capability to edit images
and graphics. Freely available Open-source tools are also a good alternative
when editing image and graphic files, for example GIMP (bitmap editor) and
Inkscape (vector drawing program). Open-source tools and many other Open-source
applications work on Windows, macOS, and Linux operating systems.

Adding
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Image and graphic files can be added to a document using one of the
following methods: •

Inserting a file directly from a graphics program, or a scanner.

•

Dragging images and graphics from a clipart gallery.

•

Copying and pasting from a source on a computer.

164

Inserting
----------------------------------------------------------------------

When an image, or graphic, file is available on the computer being
used, the file is inserted into a LibreOffice document using one of the
following methods. These insertion methods are only examples because actual
insertion does depend on the following: •

Computer operating system.

•

Computer setup.

•

LibreOffice module being used.

Drag and drop Dragging and dropping embeds a copy of the file into a document.
1)

Open a file browser window and locate the file to be inserted.

2)

Drag the file into the LibreOffice document and drop it on the selected page.

Note To link an image, or graphic, file instead of embedding, hold down the
Ctrl+Shift keys (macOS ⌘+Shift) while dragging the file.

Insert Image dialog 1)

Open a LibreOffice document and click on the page where the image, or graphic,
is to be inserted.

2)

Go to Insert > Image on the Menu bar to open the Insert Image dialog (Figure
109). This dialog is similar to a file browser window.

3)

Navigate to where the file is located and select it. If the Preview option is
selected in the Insert Image dialog, a preview of the selected image, or
graphic, appears in the Preview box.

4)

Click on Open and the image, or graphic, is embedded into the document and
Insert Image dialog closes.

Figure 109: Insert Image dialog 5)

If the image, or graphic, is going to be linked and not embedded, select the
Link option before clicking Open.

165

Note If the Link option is selected, a message box appears when Open is clicked
and the Confirm Linked Graphic dialog opens. Select Keep Link to the link the
file, or Embed Graphic to embed the image, or graphic. To prevent this message
from appearing again, deselect the option Ask when linking a graphic. When
inserting the same image, or graphic, several times in a document, LibreOffice
embeds only one copy of the file.

Copy and paste 1)

Open both the source and target documents.

2)

In the source document, select the image to be copied and copy the image to the
clipboard. Keyboard shortcut Ctrl+C or Ctrl+Ins (macOS ⌘+C)

3)

In the target document, click at the position where the image is to be placed.

4)

Paste the image from the clipboard into the document. Keyboard shortcut Ctrl+V
or Shift+Ins (macOS ⌘+V)

Note Embedding If the source document is closed before the image is pasted into
the target document, the image stored on the clipboard could be lost. Embedding
linked image, or graphic, files breaks the link to the file and becomes part of
the document. Linked images, or graphics can be embedded as follows: 1)

Open a document in LibreOffice and go to Edit > External Links on the Menu bar
to open the Edit Links dialog (Figure 110).

Figure 110: Edit Links dialog 2)

Select the files that are going to be embedded.

3)

Click on Break Link, then click Yes to confirm embedding the files.

166

Linking
----------------------------------------------------------------------

When linking images, or graphics, LibreOffice creates a link to the file
instead of saving a copy of the file in a document. The result is that the
image, or graphic, is displayed in the document. However, when the document is
saved, it contains only a reference to the linked file, not the file itself. The
document and the image, or graphic, remain as two separate files reducing file
size. Advantage File can be modified separately using a graphics program. The
modified image, or graphic, appears the next time the document is opened. This
is an advantage if another person is updating the files, for example a graphic
artist. Advantage Linking reduces the file size of the document when it is
saved, because the file itself is not included in the document. However, file
size is usually not a problem on modern computers, and LibreOffice can handle
large files. Disadvantage Sending a document with linked files to another
computer, the linked files must also be sent, or moved with the document so that
the receiver sees the linked images, or graphics in the document. Keep track of
the file locations and make sure any recipient knows where to store the files so
the document can find the files when it is opened. For example, image files
placed in a subfolder named Images in the folder containing the document. The
recipient needs to put the image files in an Images subfolder in the same folder
the document has been placed.

Scanning
----------------------------------------------------------------------

If a scanner is connected to a computer, LibreOffice can use the
scanning software to scan an image, graphic, or document, then place the scanned
media into the open document. The following scanning procedure is an example of
how to insert scanned media into a document. 1)

Go to Insert > Media > Scan > Select Source on the Menu bar and select the
scanning source from the list of available devices.

2)

Click in the document where the scanned media is to be inserted.

3)

Place the media for scanning onto the selected scanner.

4)

Go to Insert > Media > Scan > Request on the Menu bar to open the scanning
software.

5)

Click on Preview in the scanning software to scan the media and a preview image
appears in the scanning software.

6)

Adjust settings for image quality, size, and other attributes in the scanning
software.

7)

Click on Scan in the scanning software and the media is scanned. A scanned copy
of the media is inserted into the LibreOffice document.

8)

Click on Close in the scanning software to close the scanning application.

Note The scanning software must be an application that LibreOffice recognizes
and is compatible to scan and insert media into a document. After a scanning
sources has been selected, LibreOffice remembers the selected scanning source.
This eliminates the need to select a scanning source each time scanned media is
inserted into a document.

167

Figure 111: Gallery deck in Sidebar — Icon View

Inserting using the Gallery
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Gallery (Figure 111) provides a convenient way
to insert media, such as graphics and sounds, into documents. The Gallery is
available in the Writer, Calc, Impress, and Draw modules of LibreOffice. When
copied, Gallery images are embedded into a document, but can also be linked to
the Gallery image. See “LibreOffice Gallery” on page 198 for more information.
1)

Click on Gallery on the right side of the Sidebar, or use the keyboard shortcut
Ctrl+Alt+3 (macOS ⌘+⌥+3) to open the Gallery deck.

2)

Select a Gallery theme from the list provided.

3)

Select the required image from the displayed images with a single click.

4)

To insert the required image into the document use one of the following methods:
– Drag and drop the image into the document. – Right-click on the image and
select Insert in the context menu. This places the image in the center of the
document.

5)

To insert an image as a link, hold down the Shift and Ctrl (macOS ⌘) keys, then
drag and drop the object into the document.

Editing images or graphics
