LibreOffice Gallery
======================================================================

Graphics in the Gallery are grouped by themes, such as
Arrows, Diagrams, and Icons, and are installed when LibreOffice is installed on
a computer. The Gallery can be displayed in Icon View (Figure 111 on page 192),
or Detailed View (Figure 117).

Inserting Gallery images and graphics
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Gallery deck on the Sidebar contains a
collection of images and graphics that can be used in a document. Images and
graphics can also be added to the Gallery, making it an essential tool for
inserting images and graphics into a document quickly. The Gallery is available
for all LibreOffice modules.

174

1)

Open the Gallery deck in the Sidebar using one of the following methods: – Go to
Insert > Media > Gallery on the Menu bar. – Click on Gallery in the Sidebar.

Figure 117: Gallery deck on Sidebar — Detailed View 2)

Select a theme from the available themes and the images and graphics for that
theme are displayed.

3)

Scroll through the available images and graphics and select the required image
or graphic.

4)

Click and hold on the image or graphic and drag it onto the slide. Release the
hold and the image or graphic is inserted centrally onto the page.

5)

Format the image or graphic to the document requirements.

Default themes
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Images and graphics in the Gallery are grouped by themes, such as
Arrows, Bullets, Diagrams and so on. These default themes are listed
alphabetically in the box at the top of the Gallery deck on the Sidebar. Click
on a theme name to see its images and graphics displayed in the Gallery deck.
The Gallery default themes are read-only. No images or graphics can be added to
or deleted from these themes. The default themes are easily identified by
right-clicking on a theme name and the only available option in the context menu
is Properties.

Custom themes
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Custom themes, when added to the Gallery, are the only themes
where images and graphics can be added. Custom themes are listed alphabetically,
along with the default themes, in the box at the top of the Gallery deck on the
Sidebar. Custom themes are easily identified by right-clicking on a theme name
and the options available in the context menu are Delete, Rename, and
Properties. LibreOffice Gallery | 175

Custom themes can also be added to the Gallery to hold any images or graphics
that are used frequently. For example, a company logo, or images and graphics
that are used for specific projects.

Tip Gallery themes are available from the LibreOffice extensions website at
https://extensions.libreoffice.org/. This website also includes themes from
previous versions of LibreOffice that are no longer installed when newer
versions of LibreOffice are installed. See Chapter 13, Customizing LibreOffice
for information on managing extensions.

Creating themes 1)

Open the Gallery deck in the Sidebar using one of the following methods: – Go to
Insert > Media > Gallery on the Menu bar. – Click on Gallery in the Sidebar.

2)

Click New at the bottom of the Gallery deck and the Properties of New Theme
dialog opens (Figure 118).

3)

Click on General and type a name for the new theme in the text box.

4)

Click OK to save the new theme and close the dialog. The new theme is displayed
in the list of themes in the Gallery.

Figure 118: Properties of New Theme dialog — General page

Note The name of the Properties of New Theme dialog changes to show the name of
the newly created custom theme in the Gallery deck.

Adding images and graphics 1)

Right-click on a custom theme name in the theme list on the Gallery deck and
select Properties from the context menu to open the Properties of New Theme
dialog.

2)

Click on Files to open the Files page (Figure 119), then click on Find Files to
open a Select Path dialog.

3)

Navigate to the folder that contains the images and graphics required and select
the folder.

4)

Click OK to close the Select Path dialog. The files contained in the folder
appear in the Properties of New Theme dialog.

176

5)

If necessary, select Preview and any image or graphic selected appears in the
preview box.

Figure 119: Properties of New Theme dialog — Files page 6)

Select the files required for the custom theme and click on Add. The added files
disappear from the file list and the images and graphics appear in the custom
theme on the Gallery deck.

7)

To add all the files in the list, then click Add All. All the files disappear
from the list and the images and graphics appear in the custom them on the
Gallery deck.

8)

Click OK and close the Properties of New Theme dialog.

Deleting images and graphics Only images and graphics added to a custom themes
can be deleted. 1)

Open the Gallery deck and select a custom theme.

2)

Right-click on the image or graphic and select Delete from the context menu.

3)

Click Yes in the confirmation message to delete the image.

Note Images and graphics in custom themes are linked files and are deleted from
the Gallery only. The original image and graphic files are not deleted.

Updating themes All images and graphics in the Gallery are linked files. It is
recommended that any custom themes are updated on a regular basis to make sure
that all the files are still available. 1)

Open the Gallery deck and select a custom theme that contains at least one image
or graphic.

LibreOffice Gallery | 177

2)

Right-click on the name of the selected custom theme.

3)

Select Update from the context menu and the links to all the image and graphic
files are updated.

Gallery images and graphics location
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Images and graphics in the Gallery can be
located anywhere on a computer, or a network drive. When adding graphics to the
Gallery, the files are not moved or copied. Only the location of each image or
graphic added to the Gallery is used as a reference. The location of the Gallery
is specified in Tools > Options > LibreOffice > Paths (macOS LibreOffice >
Preferences > LibreOffice > Paths). If necessary, this location can be changed
and gallery files (*.sdv) can be copied to other computers. Gallery contents
provided with LibreOffice are stored in a different location. You cannot change
this location.

Note The location of Gallery themes installed using LibreOffice extensions are
determined by the extension settings.

Figure 120: Image Map Editor dialog

