Grouping objects
======================================================================

This section gives only a brief introduction to grouping of
objects. An example of grouping two objects together is shown in Figure 123. For
more information on working with grouped objects, see the specific user guide
for each LibreOffice module. Grouping of objects is similar to putting objects
into a container. Objects within a group are moved together as one object and
any changes made are applied globally to the objects within the group. A group
can always be undone and the objects that make up the group can always be
manipulated separately.

182

Temporary grouping
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Temporary grouping is when several objects are selected
together. Any changes to the objects are applied to all of the objects within
the temporary group. For example, a temporary group of objects can be rotated in
its entirety. A temporary group is created using one of the following methods: •

Hold down the Shift key whilst clicking multiple objects on a slide.

•

Click and drag the cursor to create a marquee around multiple objects. Release
the cursor and all the objects within the marquee are selected.

To cancel a temporary grouping of objects, simply click outside of the selection
handles displayed around the objects.

Permanent grouping
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1)

Objects are grouped together using one of the following methods: – Hold down the
Shift key whilst clicking multiple objects on a slide. – Click and drag the
cursor to create a marquee around multiple objects. Release the cursor and all
the objects within the marquee are selected. – To select all the objects on the
slide, go to Edit > Select All on the Menu bar, or use the keyboard shortcut
Ctrl+A (macOS ⌘+A).

2)

With selection handles displayed, use one of the following methods to create a
group of selected objects: – Go to Format > Group > Group on the Menu bar. – Use
the keyboard shortcut Ctrl+Shift+G (macOS ⌘+Shift+G). – Right-click on an object
within the selected group and select Group from the context menu.

Editing or formatting groups
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1)

Click on an object in the group to select the group. Any editing or formatting
can then be carried out on all the objects within the group or on individual
objects within the group.

2)

To edit an individual object within a group, enter the group using one of the
following methods: – Use the keyboard shortcut F3. – Go to Format > Group >
Enter Group on the Menu bar. – Right-click and select Enter Group from the
context menu.

3)

Select individual objects within the group for editing or formatting. An example
of editing individual objects in a group is shown in Figure 124.

4)

When editing or formatting is completed, use one of the following methods to
exit the group and the whole group then becomes selected: – Use the keyboard
shortcut Ctrl+F3 (macOS ⌘+F3). – Go to Format > Group > Exit Group on the Menu
bar. – Right-click and select Exit Group from the context menu.

Grouping objects | 183

Ungrouping
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1)

Click on any one of the objects in the group to select the group.

Figure 124: Example of editing inside a group 2)

With selection handles displayed, use one of the following methods to ungroup a
group of objects: – Go to Format > Group > Ungroup on the Menu bar. – Use the
keyboard shortcut Ctrl+Alt+Shift+G (macOS ⌘+⌥+Shift+G). – Right-click on the
group and select Ungroup from the context menu.

