LibreOffice drawing tools
======================================================================

Drawing tools in LibreOffice are used to create
graphics consisting of rectangles, circles, lines, text, and other predefined
shapes. Also several graphics can be grouped to maintain their relative position
and proportion with each other. Graphics are placed directly on a page in a
document, or inserted into a frame.

Tip When creating complex drawings, it is recommended to use LibreOffice Draw to
make use of more advanced drawing features, for example drawing layers and
styles.

Drawing toolbar
----------------------------------------------------------------------

An example Drawing toolbar is shown in Figure 121. If the
Drawing toolbar is not displayed, it can be opened by going to View > Toolbars >
Drawing on the Menu bar, or by clicking on Show Draw Functions on the Standard
toolbar. The default tools available on a Drawing toolbar do vary slightly
between the LibreOffice modules. Tools can be added to a Drawing toolbar using
Visible Buttons, or customizing the toolbar. See Chapter 12, Configuring
LibreOffice, Chapter 13, Customizing LibreOffice for more information, or the
specific user guide for each LibreOffice module.

180

Figure 121: Drawing toolbar — Writer module Drawing tools numbered from left to
right for Figure 121 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) 9)

Select Insert Line Lines and Arrows Curves and Polygons Curve Polygon Rectangle
Rectangle, Rounded Square

10) 11) 12) 13) 14) 15) 16) 17) 18)

Ellipse Circle Isosceles Triangle Right Triangle Basic Shapes Symbol Shapes
Block Arrows Stars and Banners Callout Shapes

19) 20) 21) 22) 23) 24) 25) 26)

Flowchart Callouts Vertical Callouts Insert Text Box Insert Vertical Text Insert
Fontwork Text Points Toggle Extrusion

Figure 122: Drawing Object Properties toolbar Drawing object properties numbered
from left to right for Figure 122 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) 9) 10)

Select anchor for object None Parallel Optimal Before After Through Align
Objects Bring to Front Forward One

11) 12) 13) 14) 15) 16) 17) 18) 19)

Back One Send to Back To Foreground To Background Select start and end
arrowheads for lines Line Style Line Width Line Color Area Style/Filling

20) 21) 22) 23) 24) 25) 26) 27)

Fill Color Rotate Points Group Enter Group Exit Group Ungroup Insert Caption

Note The following procedures are examples only using LibreOffice Writer. Actual
procedures depend on the LibreOffice module being used, computer operating
system, and computer setup.

Inserting drawing objects
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1)

Click in the document at the position where the drawing is to be placed.

2)

Select the drawing required tool on the Drawing toolbar and the following
happens: – The cursor changes shape to indicate drawing mode is selected. – The
Formatting toolbar changes to the Drawing Object Properties toolbar (Figure
122).

LibreOffice drawing tools | 181

3)

Click and drag to create the drawing object using the default properties.

4)

Release the cursor and the selected drawing tool remains active. This allows
drawing another object of the same type.

5)

If necessary, select another drawing object to draw a different shape of drawing
object.

6)

Press the Esc key, or deselect the drawing object to cancel drawing mode.

Changing properties
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1)

Click on Select on the Drawing toolbar, then select the drawing object.

2)

On the Drawing Object Properties toolbar, select each property tool required for
the drawing object.

3)

If necessary, select the property value from the available options.

4)

Select the type of drawing object required on the Drawing toolbar.

5)

Click and drag to create the drawing object using the selected properties.

Figure 123: Example of grouping objects 6)

To change properties for another drawing object, repeat Steps 2 and 3 before
drawing the object.

7)

Press the Esc key, or deselect the drawing object to cancel drawing mode.

Editing drawing objects
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Editing drawing objects uses the same procedures that
are used for editing images and graphics. See “Images and graphics” on page 188
for more information.

